igvmmeasure/README.md, before:

# igvmmeasure
A tool to calculate the launch measurement for the directives in an IGVM file.

When starting a guest configured using an IGVM file, the directives in the IGVM
are use to populate initial guest memory and describe the initial guest state.
This configuration is measured by the isolation technology, such as SEV-SNP or
TDX and results in a launch digest that can be remotely verified using an
attestation report.

In order to ensure the integrity of a build that is packed in IGVM, it is
necessary to be able to pre-calculate the measurement of the file to obtain the
expected launch digest. This can then be compared with the actual launch
measurement in the attestation report to ensure the initial guest state is as
expected.

Given an IGVM file, igvmmeasure parses the directives in the file and calculates
the launch digest and outputs it as a hexadecimal string.

## IGVM validation
There are some restrictions on the contents of an IGVM file when using QEMU with
KVM which impose some rules on the directives in the IGVM file. This is due to
the way the initial guest state is passed from QEMU user mode to KVM in the
kernel. Therefore, IGVM files for this virtualization stack must conform to
these rules.

Passing the `--check-kvm` option to igvmmeasure will result in some basic checks
being performed on the directives in the file during the measurement process.
This can be use to help diagnose measurement mismatches, or to abort the IGVM
build process if a non-conformant file is generated.

## Usage
`igvmmeasure [OPTIONS] <IGVM_FILE>`

### Arguments:
```
  <IGVM_FILE>
          The filename of the IGVM file to measure
```

### Options:
```
  -v, --verbose    Print verbose output
  -b, --bare       Bare output only, consisting of just the digest as a hex string
  -p, --platform <PLATFORM>
          Platform to calculate the launch measurement for
          [default: sev-snp]
          Possible values:
          - sev-snp: Calculate the launch measurement for SEV-SNP
  -c, --check-kvm  Check that the IGVM file conforms to QEMU/KVM restrictions
  -n, --native-zero
          Determine how to pages that contain only zeroes in the IGVM file.
          When true, zero pages are measured using the native zero page type if the underlying platform supports it.
          When false, the page is measured as a normal page containing all zeros.
  -h, --help       Print help
```

Commit message:

igvmmeasure: Check ID block measurement matches calculated measurement
If an ID block containing an expected measurement is present in the IGVM
file then the expected measurement in the ID block is checked against
the calculated measurement, generating an error if the measurements
differ.

This check can be disabled with the --ignore-idblock command line
parameter.

Signed-off-by: Roy Hopkins <roy.hopkins@suse.com>

igvmmeasure/README.md, after:

# igvmmeasure
A tool to calculate the launch measurement for the directives in an IGVM file.

When starting a guest configured using an IGVM file, the directives in the IGVM
are use to populate initial guest memory and describe the initial guest state.
This configuration is measured by the isolation technology, such as SEV-SNP or
TDX and results in a launch digest that can be remotely verified using an
attestation report.

In order to ensure the integrity of a build that is packed in IGVM, it is
necessary to be able to pre-calculate the measurement of the file to obtain the
expected launch digest. This can then be compared with the actual launch
measurement in the attestation report to ensure the initial guest state is as
expected.

Given an IGVM file, igvmmeasure parses the directives in the file and calculates
the launch digest and outputs it as a hexadecimal string.

## IGVM validation
There are some restrictions on the contents of an IGVM file when using QEMU with
KVM which impose some rules on the directives in the IGVM file. This is due to
the way the initial guest state is passed from QEMU user mode to KVM in the
kernel. Therefore, IGVM files for this virtualization stack must conform to
these rules.

Passing the `--check-kvm` option to igvmmeasure will result in some basic checks
being performed on the directives in the file during the measurement process.
This can be use to help diagnose measurement mismatches, or to abort the IGVM
build process if a non-conformant file is generated.

## Usage
`igvmmeasure [OPTIONS] <IGVM_FILE>`

### Arguments:
```
  <IGVM_FILE>
          The filename of the IGVM file to measure
```

### Options:
```
  -v, --verbose    Print verbose output
  -b, --bare       Bare output only, consisting of just the digest as a hex string
  -p, --platform <PLATFORM>
          Platform to calculate the launch measurement for
          [default: sev-snp]
          Possible values:
          - sev-snp: Calculate the launch measurement for SEV-SNP
  -c, --check-kvm  Check that the IGVM file conforms to QEMU/KVM restrictions
  -n, --native-zero
          Determine how to pages that contain only zeroes in the IGVM file.
          When true, zero pages are measured using the native zero page type if the underlying platform supports it.
          When false, the page is measured as a normal page containing all zeros.
  -i, --ignore-idblock
          If an ID block is present within the IGVM file then by default an error will be generated if the expected
          measurement differs from the calculated measurement.
          If this option is set then the expected measurement in the ID block is ignored.
  -h, --help       Print help
```
